MSCNNNN: Add additional OpenID user info fields (#3356)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/3356-add-openid-userinfo-fields.md

# MSC3356: Add additional fields to the openid user info

The Matrix OpenID user info API (represented by the endpoints `/_matrix/client/r0/user/.../openid/request_token` and `/_matrix/federation/v1/openid/userinfo`) may be used by widgets (i.e. third party applications) to authenticate users against their current Matrix session.

Currently the Matrix user id (Field `sub`) is the only field included in the user info. Especially for room-based access control, like it is implemented for Jitsi conferences (see https://github.com/matrix-org/prosody-mod-auth-matrix-user-verification), additional information (room memberships and powerlevels) must be fetched via Synapse-specific endpoints, which requires a specific administrative access token per Synapse-homeserver.

## Proposal

To enable third party applications for simple room-based access control, the openid user info returned by `/_matrix/federation/v1/openid/userinfo` shall be extended by the following fields:

> 1. `name` The user's current display name.

Author: See https://github.com/jkanefendt/matrix-doc/commit/79fa1850658f7946d8dd5b780e2fac7a7d8e45de

2. `room_powerlevels` A map between the id of the local rooms the user is joined to and the respective currently held power level.

```json
{
   "sub": "@johndoe:example.com",
   "name": "John Doe",

>    "room_powerlevels": {

Reviewer: It is worth noting that technically powerlevels mean nothing without knowledge about the room. In general the default meanings are common but this isn't true for arbitrary rooms.

Author: Yes, this is for a very specific use case. The room id is passed to the application (in this case Jitsi) as an identifier for an application ressource (in this case a Jitsi conference room). The application itself uses `room_powerlevels` to verify the user's room membership.

Reviewer: But if the use case is just telling that a user is in the room why do we provide the powerlevel at all? It seems that we either should:

1. Just pass membership.
2. Specify which permissions are allowed based on the user's power level.

Reviewer 2: Power level (and thus membership) is useful for a wide range of cases including making Jitsi folks moderator when they're also moderator in the room. The number alone is indeed not all that useful outside of the context of the whole event, so we could provide a minimal version of the power level content in the response instead. 

In order to preserve as much privacy as possible, the suggestion would be to include the power level event `content` verbatim with all other users except the subject excluded from the `users` list. If the subject is not already present, it'd be an empty object.

Author: @turt2live If i understood you correctly the user info might look like this (include all fields from the event's `content`, undisclose all power levels except the subject's in `users`):
```json
{
   "sub": "@johndoe:example.com",
   "name": "John Doe",
   "org.matrix.msc3356.room_powerlevels": {
      "!zqoHDglfYXhEaDJxKy:example.com": {
         "users": {
            "@johndoe:example.com": 100
         },
         "users_default": 0,
         "events": {
            "m.room.name": 50,
            "m.room.power_levels": 100,
            "m.room.history_visibility": 100,
            "m.room.canonical_alias": 50,
            "m.room.avatar": 50,
            "m.room.tombstone": 100,
            "m.room.server_acl": 100,
            "m.room.encryption": 100
         }, 
         "events_default": 0, 
         "state_default": 50, 
         "ban": 50, 
         "kick": 50, 
         "redact": 50, 
         "invite": 0, 
         "historical": 100
      }
   }
}
```
One drawback with this is that the relying party (Jitsi in our usecase) must have knowledge of how to derive the user's effective power level (e.g. using `state_default` if it's not explicitly set for the subject in `users`).
Anyway, i agree that this is a more portable solution. Please let me know if i should change the proposal accordingly.

Reviewer 2: The Jitsi side will indeed need to know how to parse the user's power level, which is what the added context of the content is meant to allow for. It's just not safe to assume that 50 means moderator (for example) at this level.

I would suggest changing the MSC - I can't demand changes 😉

Author: > 
> I would suggest changing the MSC - I can't demand changes wink

Your suggestion looked good to me - see https://github.com/jkanefendt/matrix-doc/commit/75f7125a14d2d6190f02575e241c3ad358c11fa4

      "!zqoHDglfYXhEaDJxKy:example.com": 100,
      "!omkHaNDeHnPdcmHCcE:example.com": 50
   }
}

> ```

Reviewer: This doc needs a security considerations section. A list of rooms that I am in is a *lot* of info to give every OAuth request without any confirmation. At the very least I should be able to select which rooms I inform the server about. Probably a more common use case is the third-party to request information about a specific room.

Author: See https://github.com/jkanefendt/matrix-doc/commit/0cf339e2f5b6355fbab37681746ae01c5a8742d8

## Proposal

To enable third party applications for simple room-based access control, the OpenID user info returned by `/_matrix/federation/v1/openid/userinfo` shall be extended by the following fields:

1. `name` The user's current display name. This value may be used to enforce consistent user names between Matrix and the third party application.

2. `avatar_url` The user's avatar url _(optional)_.

2. `room_powerlevels` A map between the id of the local rooms the user is joined to and the respective currently held power level.

```json
{
   "sub": "@johndoe:example.com",
   "name": "John Doe",
   "avatar_url": "https://eu.ui-avatars.com/api/?name=John+Doe",
   "room_powerlevels": {
      "!zqoHDglfYXhEaDJxKy:example.com": 100,
      "!omkHaNDeHnPdcmHCcE:example.com": 50
   }
}
```

## Security Considerations

> As the additional fields may contain sensitive information, they shall not be exposed by default. Instead, the [OpenID token request endpoint](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/latest#id603)  `/_matrix/client/r0/user/.../openid/request_token` shall be extended to accept a user-/client-defined set of requested user info fields for the specific token. The set may be specified as an array `userinfo_fields` in an optional JSON request body:

Reviewer 2: please line wrap to ~100 characters 😇

Author: See https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3356/commits/7f43ddf471045d48a2a6ea6a2b0f777b5c10a760

```
POST /_matrix/client/r0/user/%40johndoe%3Aexample.com/openid/request_token HTTP/1.1
Content-Type: application/json

{ "userinfo_fields": [ "display_name", "room_powerlevels" ] }

> ```

Reviewer: IIUC this information is normative and needs to be in the design not the security considerations section. For example the security considerations can just express that users will likely share more than they strictly need to and that this API doesn't provide fine-grained requests so the user has to pick between over-sharing and under-sharing.

Reviewer 2: Security considerations are part of the proposal design fwiw.

Reviewer 3: +1, please can this be moved to the main proposal section.

> Security considerations are part of the proposal design fwiw.

This is true, but I'd still like to see these changes called out as part of the core proposal. It's rather misleading to discover that only half the proposed changes are in that section.

# MSC3356: Add additional fields to the openid user info

The Matrix OpenID user info API (represented by the endpoints `/_matrix/client/r0/user/.../openid/request_token` 
and `/_matrix/federation/v1/openid/userinfo`) may be used by widgets (i.e. third party applications) to authenticate 
users against their current Matrix session.

Currently the Matrix user id (Field `sub`) is the only field included in the user info. Especially for room-based 
access control, like it is implemented for Jitsi conferences (see 
https://github.com/matrix-org/prosody-mod-auth-matrix-user-verification), additional information 
(room memberships and powerlevels) must be fetched via Synapse-specific endpoints, which requires a specific 
administrative access token per Synapse-homeserver.

## Proposal

> To enable third party applications for simple room-based access control, the OpenID user info returned by 
> `/_matrix/federation/v1/openid/userinfo` shall be extended by the following fields:

Reviewer 3: it's super helpul to readers if you can provide links to the current spec:

```suggestion
To enable third party applications for simple room-based access control, the OpenID user info returned by 
[`/_matrix/federation/v1/openid/userinfo`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.2/server-server-api/#get_matrixfederationv1openiduserinfo)
shall be extended by the following fields:
```

1. `display_name` The user's current display name. This value may be used to enforce consistent user names between Matrix 
and the third party application.

2. `avatar_url` The user's avatar url _(optional)_.

> 3. `room_powerlevels` A map between the id of every local room the user is joined to and the content of the room's power 

Reviewer 4: I think it's worth noting that someone can set up a fake/patched homeserver and forge the response to be whatever they like here.
In other words, it's not safe to rely on this for room-based access control unless you trust the user's homeserver — I think it would be worth noting since this effectively means doing this with decentralisation is unsafe.

I would have thought the safest way to get this information would be using a bot on a homeserver that the service controls — the bot doesn't need to use Synapse-specific endpoints; it can use standard client-server endpoints. It must however be in the rooms it wants to know about.

Reviewer 2: it does sort of depend on whether the server is in a controlled setup or not. In the proposed case, it's not likely to be abused however if we do indeed include the information then there's a good chance someone will expect it to be safe when it's not...

I think this ties back into blocking such a feature behind auth improvements more generally, such as the OAuth 2.0 experiments.

> 3. `room_powerlevels` A map between the id of every local room the user is joined to and the content of the room's power 

Reviewer 2: This feels like a lot of data to return on a large account. Ideally we'd have a way to limit it to certain rooms.

Reviewer 5: I can see a use case where one might want to issue a token proving membership of a certain room. This could perhaps be done by supplying a (list of) room ID(s) when POSTing to the `request_token` endpoint: `{ "userinfo_fields": [ "display_name", {"room_powerlevels": ["!abcdef0123456789"]} ] }`

level state event (type `m.room.power_levels`). The map `user` must be filtered to contain only the subject's power level, 
if it has been set explicitely.

```json
{
   "sub": "@johndoe:example.com",
   "display_name": "John Doe",
   "avatar_url": "https://eu.ui-avatars.com/api/?name=John+Doe",
   "room_powerlevels": {
      "!zqoHDglfYXhEaDJxKy:example.com": {
         "users": {
            "@johndoe:example.com": 100
         },
         "users_default": 0,
         "events": {
            "m.room.name": 50,
            "m.room.power_levels": 100,
            "m.room.history_visibility": 100,
            "m.room.canonical_alias": 50,
            "m.room.avatar": 50,
            "m.room.tombstone": 100,
            "m.room.server_acl": 100,
            "m.room.encryption": 100
         }, 
         "events_default": 0, 
         "state_default": 50, 
         "ban": 50, 
         "kick": 50, 
         "redact": 50, 
         "invite": 0, 
         "historical": 100
      }
   }
}
```

## Security Considerations

> As the additional fields may contain sensitive information, they shall not be exposed by default. Instead, the 

Reviewer 5: Since one can obtain potentially sensitive info using this token, shouldn't the [SS API  `/_matrix/federation/v1/openid/userinfo`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.4/server-server-api/#get_matrixfederationv1openiduserinfo) endpoint be a POST instead of GET to protect the token?

Reviewer 2: we might be limited by the OpenID spec a bit on this, ftr. Not actually sure if it requires anything of us.

Reviewer 5: Fair point.
It makes sense to use GET here as that may imply calls to the API being idempotent.
However GET arguments tend to leak to logs etc as they are part of the URL. The attack vector is probably usually limited, since the admin controlling matrix server and DB likely is likely the same controlling SSL termination.

> [OpenID token request endpoint](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/latest#id603) 
> `/_matrix/client/r0/user/.../openid/request_token` shall be extended to accept a user-/client-defined set of 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
OpenID token request endpoint
[`/_matrix/client/v3/user/.../openid/request_token`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.2/client-server-api/#post_matrixclientv3useruseridopenidrequest_token)
shall be extended to accept a user-/client-defined set of 
```
